a leader is someone who influences a
group of individuals to accomplish a
common goal whether that goal is to
design a fuel-efficient car respond to
an international military crisis or find
a new company health plan now there are
many different ideas out there about how
to become an effective leader some
suggest that leaders must have certain
traits such as intelligence or
self-confidence
so she ability maybe even being tall
others say it's about technique or skill
that leaders can acquire but in a
failure of nerve the late Edwin Friedman
goes against the grain of leadership
studies and suggests that effective
leadership is not about traits or skills
as much as it is an emotional process of
regulating one's own anxiety he refers
to this process as self differentiation
or knowing where one ends and another
begins
this is a systems perspective on
leadership rooted in cell biology take
this healthy biological cell it has a
nucleus which controls the activity of
the cell it has these mitochondria
floating around here and it has a cell
membrane which keeps the cell separate
from other cells when they hang out
together to form biological tissue like
this heart this heart cell is
differentiated it knows its purpose is
to pump blood bumbum bumbum bumbum
despite what these uppity brain cells
may think boom boom boom boom boom boom
not only are we humans made up of these
cells we function like them we also form
ourselves into groups whether these are
families companies
or Nations like an individual cell a
differentiated person can stay connected
to others without losing his or her
identity or without taking on the
emotional anxiety of the group a
differentiated leader can take a
well-defined stand even when followers
disagree while remaining connected in a
meaningful way with others now here's
the deal some people in these
organizations are poorly differentiated
and they act like viruses viruses do not
have a nucleus or a core organizing
principle so they cannot exist on their
own rather they look for other poorly
differentiated cells that are easy to
latch on to now this may look like
harmless workplace gossip but what they
are doing is infecting the organization
with their anxiety they cannot handle
one-on-one conflict with another person
so they attempt to rope in a third
person thinking this will lessen the
anxiety
this is what Friedman calls emotional
triangles and if you are the one being
roped in or triangle it's so tempting to
in mesh yourself with the drama it's
even flattering hey you are being asked
to help out in a situation so this
person must really trust you but don't
do it don't get triangle because this
only leads to getting stuck and only
results in more anxiety in the system
and the infection spreads and worse it's
bad for you Friedman says that the chief
cause of stress and burnout is not
overworking like we all think but
getting stuck in other people's problems
or getting triangle but the
differentiated leader is like the
emotional immune system of an
organization by being a non anxious
presence differentiated leaders resist
being triangle which influences others
to take responsibility for themselves
this is very counterintuitive to those
of us who are used to chronically
anxious organizations but Friedman says
that differentiated leaders are able to
tolerate other people's discomfort
because this encourages them to take
personal responsibility in the long run
the differentiated leaders presence has
the effect of defusing the anxiety in
the organization allowing it to develop
and function in a healthy way now about
sabotage some organizational systems are
chronically anxious in other words they
have a lot of people who are poorly
differentiated such an organization will
be threatened by the presence of a
differentiated leader because in a way
this upsets the way things have always
been or the homeostasis
of the organization so the chronically
anxious organization will inevitably
turn on the differentiated leader but
according to Friedman sabotage is a sign
that the leader is doing the right thing
and it's the leaders non-anxious
response to such sabotage that defines
the differentiated leader this he says
is the key to the kingdom of effective
leadership the beauty of this approach
to leadership is that it applies to
anyone at any leadership level whether
you are as Friedman says a parent or a
president finally differentiated
leadership is not a static condition
none of us arrives completely at this
place
rather differentiated leadership is a
direction in life a direction toward
maturity and the only way we can get
moving in that direction is to take care
of our self or as Jesus of Nazareth said
to love your neighbor as you love your
self